adding custom middleware page (#5516)
umbraco/UmbracoDocs: 12/umbraco-cms/reference/routing/custom-middleware.md

---
description: "Customizing the ASP.NET middleware pipeline in Umbraco"
---

# Middleware

> Middleware is a way of handling requests and responses before or after they are completed. An example can be checking if a user is logged in before adding an item to the cart. In this example it checks something before an http request is made.

Reviewer: The middleware is responsible for actually processing/customizing the incoming request and generating the outgoing response in a pipeline (built from request delegates), so they're not something added before and after they are completed.

This is probably better explained in the first paragraph of the MS documentation: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/fundamentals/middleware/?view=aspnetcore-7.0.

> Middleware is a way of handling requests and responses before or after they are completed. An example can be checking if a user is logged in before adding an item to the cart. In this example it checks something before an http request is made.

Author: ```suggestion
Middleware is responsible for processing/customizing an incoming request before generating an outgoing response. Shortly defined the middleware is a step to check the requests before giving a response back. 
```

> In Umbraco we configure some middleware by default and in a specific order based on the [Microsoft Documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/fundamentals/middleware/?view=aspnetcore-7.0#middleware-order).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Umbraco automatically configures all required middleware in the `WithMiddleware()` method in s specific order based on the [Microsoft documentation](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/fundamentals/middleware/?view=aspnetcore-7.0#middleware-order).
```

> You are also able to add your own in-between middleware by using the Umbraco pipeline filters. In addtion you can also add settings such as: the `PrePipeline`, `PostPipeline`, `PreRouting`, `PostRouting`, and [`Endpoints`](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/fundamentals/routing?view=aspnetcore-7.0#endpoints) callbacks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use Umbraco pipeline filters in case you want to add your own middleware before, in-between or after the default Umbraco middleware. Filters are added by configuring the `UmbracoPipelineOptions` and require an instance of `IUmbracoPipelineFilter` that contains the following callbacks:
```

- `PrePipeline` - executed before any Umbraco-specific middleware is added, an example can be [URL rewrites](iisrewriterules.md).
- `PreRouting` - executed after the static files middleware and before the [routing middleware](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/fundamentals/routing?view=aspnetcore-7.0) is added (using `UseRouting()`). It can also be used to change the incoming URL.

> - `PostRouting` - executed after the routing middleware is added and can be used to [configure CORS](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/security/cors?view=aspnetcore-7.0).

Author: ```suggestion
- `PostRouting` - executed after the routing middleware is added and can be used to [configure Cross-origin resource sharing (CORS)](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/security/cors?view=aspnetcore-7.0).
```

> - `PrePipeline` occurs as an early stage of request pipeline and an influence how requests are processed. An example of using Prepipeline can be for [URL rewrites](iisrewriterules.md)
> - `PostPipeline`renders content. By using middleware, the response of content can be changed before being rendered.
> - `PreRouting`can be used to change the incoming URL/definers which URL should be served for the content
> - `PostRouting`can be used to change how the content should be displayed based on routing parameters.
> - `Endpoints` is the final step of the request pipeline where the content is rendered and returned on the requested browser.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `PrePipeline` - executed before any Umbraco specific middleware is added, an example can be [URL rewrites](iisrewriterules.md).
- `PreRouting` - executed after the static files middleware and before the [routing middleware](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/fundamentals/routing?view=aspnetcore-7.0) is added (using `UseRouting()`) and can be used to change the incoming URL.
- `PostRouting` - executed after the routing middleware is added and can be used to [configure CORS](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/aspnet/core/security/cors?view=aspnetcore-7.0).
- `PostPipeline` - executed after all Umbraco specific middleware is added.
- `Endpoints` - executed just before the Umbraco specific endpoints are added using `WithEndpoints()`.
```

> - `Endpoints` - executed just before the Umbraco-specific endpoints are added using `WithEndpoints()`.

Author: ```suggestion
- `Endpoints` - executed right before the Umbraco-specific endpoints are added using `WithEndpoints()`.
```

> The addition of the `PreRouting` and `PostRouting` is to allow correctly configuring the Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) middleware. This is done using the `IUmbracoPipelineFilters` without having to use the `WithCustomMiddleware()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The addition of the `PostRouting` callback is to allow correctly configuring the Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) middleware without having to use the `WithCustomMiddleware()` method.
```

- `IUmbracoPipelineFilter` is an interface in Umbraco that allows the creation of custom filters which then modifies the behavior of the request pipeline. It can be used to change different aspects of how Umbraco handles incoming requests, such as changing content or adding security checks.

> - `WithCustomMiddleware()` is a method that can be used in Umbraco for adding custom middleware. This includes some specific customizable instructions that run in the request processing pipeline. This method is often used in combination with IUmbracoPipelineFilter.

Reviewer: I'm not sure if this adds any value and might actually add to the confusion, because `IUmbracoPipelineFilter` can be used independently of whether `WithMiddleware()` or `WithCustomMiddleware()` is used...

Author: Oh I see! My point here was it would be nice to define what are IUmbracoPipelineFilter and WithCustomMiddleware as they are mentioned in this article. 😄 

I can then remove "This method is often used in combination with IUmbracoPipelineFilter." from WithCustomMiddleware. Otherwise, do you think the definitions are ok? 💡

> - `WithCustomMiddleware()` is a method that can be used in Umbraco for adding custom middleware. This includes some specific customizable instructions that run in the request processing pipeline. This method is often used in combination with IUmbracoPipelineFilter.

Author: ```suggestion
- `WithCustomMiddleware()` is a method that can be used in Umbraco for adding custom middleware. This includes some specific customizable instructions that run in the request processing pipeline. 
```

{% hint style="warning" %}

> `WithCustomMiddleware` should only be used as a last resort, as Umbraco can break if you forget to add middleware or add them in the wrong order.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `WithCustomMiddleware()` instead of `WithMiddelware()` should only be used as a last resort, as Umbraco can break if you forget to add middleware or add them in the wrong order.
```

> Using `WithCustomMiddleware()` instead of `WithMiddelware()` should only be used as a last resort, as Umbraco can break if you forget to add middleware or add them in the wrong order.

Author: ```suggestion
Using `WithCustomMiddleware()` instead of `WithMiddelware()` should only be used as a last resort. This is because Umbraco can break if you forget to add middleware or add them in the wrong order.
```

{% endhint %}

## Configuring the Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) middleware

Create a composer with the following:

```csharp

using Umbraco.Cms.Core.Composing;
using Umbraco.Cms.Web.Common.ApplicationBuilder;

public class CorsComposer : IComposer
{
    public const string AllowAnyOriginPolicyName = nameof(AllowAnyOriginPolicyName);

    public void Compose(IUmbracoBuilder builder)
        => builder.Services
        .AddCors(options => options.AddPolicy(AllowAnyOriginPolicyName, policy => policy.AllowAnyOrigin()))
        .Configure<UmbracoPipelineOptions>(options => options.AddFilter(new UmbracoPipelineFilter("Cors", postRouting: app => app.UseCors())))
        // For testing only
        .Configure<UmbracoPipelineOptions>(options => options.AddFilter(new UmbracoPipelineFilter("CorsTest", endpoints: app => app.UseEndpoints(endpoints =>
        {
            endpoints.MapGet("/echo", context => context.Response.WriteAsync("echo")).RequireCors(AllowAnyOriginPolicyName);
            endpoints.MapGet("/echo2", context => context.Response.WriteAsync("echo2"));
        }))));
}
```

> You should be able to request /echo from any origin, but get an error when trying to fetch /echo2. You can test this by pasting the following JavaScript code in your browser console when not on the local Umbraco website (such as Umbraco.com):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should be able to request `/echo` from any origin, but get an error when trying to fetch `/echo2` from a foreign origin. You can test this by pasting the following JavaScript code in your browser console when not on the local origin/Umbraco website (such as umbraco.com):
```

> ```json

Reviewer 2: Should this not be formatted as javascript and not JSON?

Author: makes sense, I have changed it to javascript 💪

> You should be able to request `/echo` from any origin, but get an error when trying to fetch `/echo2` from a foreign origin. You can test this by pasting the following JavaScript code in your browser console when not on the local origin/Umbraco website (such as umbraco.com):

Author: ```suggestion
You should be able to request `/echo` from any origin, but get an error when trying to fetch `/echo2` from a foreign origin. This can be tested by pasting the following JavaScript code in browser console when not on the local origin/Umbraco website (such as umbraco.com):
```

fetch('https://localhost:44331/echo', {method: 'GET'}).then(result => result.text().then(text => console.log(text)));
fetch('https://localhost:44331/echo2', {method: 'GET'}).then(result => result.text().then(text => console.log(text)));
```

This should return the following:
<figure><img src="../images/custom-middleware-cors-browser-example.png" alt=""><figcaption><p>Browser result image</p></figcaption></figure>

An additional bonus is that this doesn't require any changes in your `Startup.cs` file. It also allows packages to enable Cross-Origin Resource Sharing (CORS) and configure their own policies.

Users that currently use `WithCustomMiddleware()` will need to add calls to `RunPreRouting()` and `RunPostRouting()`. This is similar to Umbraco adding additional middleware in future versions.

> You can find more information about this example in the github PR [Add PreRouting and PostRouting pipeline filters](https://github.com/umbraco/Umbraco-CMS/pull/14503)

Reviewer: Do we actually refer to PRs in our documentation or should we make sure everything is covered in this page?
```suggestion
You can find more information about this example in the GitHub PR [Add PreRouting and PostRouting pipeline filters](https://github.com/umbraco/Umbraco-CMS/pull/14503).
```
